[LOGO SOUND PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The holistic world of healing
includes plants and herbs,
channeling energy as well as
both spiritual and physical
modalities.
Healers are
multidimensional beings
who dance between the realms
of the seen and unseen.
These individuals
have the ability
to facilitate a shift in
people, offering them insight
and support, reconnecting people
with themselves and the greater
collective, healing the
world one person at a time,
healing from the other side.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The communication that I'm
receiving is that the ancestors
want to be remembered.
Even though they
were simple people,
it wasn't that they weren't
incredibly advanced.
There's a way of being that they
knew and understood inherently
that is so in alignment with
our natural surroundings,
our natural environment.
[HUMMING]
I'm a channel or a conduit to
the energy that comes through.
So I think for me, I need to
empty myself of expectation
in order to be moved or steered
by the spirit of the Saan
or the spirit of
the trance dance.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'm from the Cederburg, a
beautiful spot in the Western
Cape.
I was born in Ceres.
I grew up in Citrusdal,
what I've now
come to understand is being
sort of an ancient ancestral
highway.
And then I've been in Cape Town,
the birthplace of humanity,
since 2005.
My heritage is a
little bit convoluted
because of the I suppose
history of South Africa.
So I would be--
on a document,
government document,
classed as Colored although
I would describe myself
as being of Khoi
and San descent,
which would have been the
first people of South Africa.
So for me the history
of the Khoi and the Saan
is not actually something
that I grew up with.
In fact, the very
opposite of it.
It-- I feel like with the
history of South Africa,
there is such a deep-seated
trauma I want to say.
I remember the specific
instance of seeing
a picture of Saan people with
a bow and arrow and me being
like, whoa, that's not me.
Yeah, there's definitely
an element of, like,
wanting to distance myself or
having done that in the past.
And so what has happened now
recently is for the maybe past
five, six years since I've
been on my spiritual journey is
that it has actually found me.
The spirit of the
ancestors seems
to want to use me as
a sort of mouthpiece
for an ancient way
of being, and I
find that for me I have found
my sense of belonging ever
since I started identifying
as Khoi and Saan.
Khoi, of course, means human,
which I undisputedly am.
And then the Saan,
I have recently
started to connect with more on
a sort of spiritual level, more
getting in touch with the
dancing and trance dancing
around the fire and
through making music
that is trance dance inspired.
It's been done for
thousands of years
by the Saan people who
were a nomadic people.
If there was an illness in
the family, in the tribe,
they would dance for
days, hours upon end.
And for me, I seem
to be able to tap in
or tune into that frequency
or power more frequently now,
and it's for me certainly
really profound, a really
profound experience.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Trance dancing is an
Indigenous ritual and a form
of hypnosis in which a state
of altered consciousness is
achieved.
It is recognized as a
magical and sacred power,
generally amplifying
emotion and song,
and it can last for many
hours if not all night.
Trance dance can take several
forms, and while in trance,
the shaman is able to
consult with the spirits
of the ancestors.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I was a musician, a
singer-songwriter called--
and I called myself
Khoisan boyMan,
which was a tribute to
the people that I speak
of, the Khoi and the Saan.
And the boy was also
a reference to the boy
that I was who
was misunderstood,
and the man was who I
was hoping to become.
And then last year when
hard lockdown happened,
I was like who am
I without music
and who am I
without this guitar,
and all these questions came up.
And so I actually ended
up discovering the bow.
But instead of using
it as a weapon,
I use it as an
instrument, and that
has rekindled something that
was missing for me definitely.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The transition that naturally
happened from switching from
singer-songwriter was I knew
that there was always a bigger
purpose to me doing music
and even when I worked with
a sangoma in the past--
we did a divination--
and one of my ancestors
my father's mother,
my grandmother actually came
through and she said to me--
I never met her--
and she came
through, and she said
music is your
medicine, just not in
the way that you think it is.
And it took me--
took me a while to
understand that,
but I think I'm
getting closer to it.
>> For me, playing the bow and
doing sound journeys rather
than the conventional song
sung by song format has crossed
a threshold I would say.
Because we live in
a modern day society
where there isn't people just
simply living in the Bush
and doing trance dance, I've had
to adapt my own version of it.
I hope to one day still go to
a trance dance in the Kalahari
or Botswana, but for now,
this is a way that I've found.
So how it has come to
fruition for me is it's--
it started as full
moon ceremonies, which
was for me also life changing.
The difference
that it makes in--
certainly in my life to
align myself to the moon
cycles has been transformatory.
So it started off as
full moon ceremonies,
but then I was like it's--
something's missing.
Then it was now we're going
to go do retreat spaces,
so then you leave
the city in order
to be away from
the distractions.
Also working with medicine
whether it's cacao
or whether it's psilocybin
or whether it's just
completely sober in the trance
and the dance and the music
is the medicine, that's
always a different process.
For me, it's giving
the offering,
asking for guidance
and assistance,
and then leaving
myself open to be
guided by the
spirit of the music
and the trance
and the ancestors.
Definitely the trance
dance has massively
helped me find a
place of belonging.
It comes with a sense of lament
because trance dance definitely
I feel there's something
else that takes over
and I have these visions
of being around the fire
whether I'm looking
at a physical fire
but then I realize that this
is actually a different fire.
So there's this
element of deep sadness
that comes along
with it as well.
Sometimes that's
been the experience.
Of course, the intention is
to dance through heartbreak
and trauma into bliss, but some
of the experiences that I've
had has been lament and deep
sadness for that sense of tribe
or communion or healing
that has been taken away
or should I rather say doesn't
feature in our day-to-day lives
anymore.
>> People like Gershon find
healing through a connection
to the ancients and
the spirit world.
There are many
rituals and ceremonies
used by various cultures
to connect to ancestors,
go within, and find healing.
But Saan trance dance
is amongst the oldest
as the Saan people come from
the oldest lineages of mankind.
When connecting to elders,
ancestors, or simply
the spirit world, an
offering is generally made.
So usually when you're working
with traversing between worlds
and you're communing
with the ancestors,
there's always a form of
offering that is required.
So for me, I like to burn
what we call [NON-ENGLISH]
or [NON-ENGLISH] which is
like bushman's bed stuff,
loosely translated.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
And that is a herb that
is used as an invocation.
So I would call in my guides.
I would call in my ancestors.
I would call in the
ancestors of the land.
I would call in spirit animals.
In a ceremony that
I had recently,
I was told by the ancestors,
the spirits of the ancestors,
that they are waiting.
They are waiting for the new
form of Bushman to incarnate,
the spirit of the
Saan, Bushman, is
waiting to incarnate in a
new space and a new time
when it is safe, in a
new space, in a new time,
in a new space,
spirit of the Bushmen,
a new space, in the new time.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Feel welcome, my ancestors.
And then once the
offering is done
and the message has been
received that it's good,
then I will go to the
location where I will stump
and give another offering, the
offering of my talent or gift
and becoming the conduit
between the other world
and this material plane.
>> Coming up next, we watch as
Gershon heads to a place called
ascension cave where he
makes his second offering
to the ancestors and trance
dances to the other side.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So there's several sacred
sites around the world,
but specifically
in South Africa,
there are numerous sacred sites.
A few of them are in Cape
Town and this ancient cave
being one of them.
[VOCALIZING]
This cave is special
for many reasons,
but the main ones is because
it's actually an ancient burial
site where the remains
of 14 bodies were found,
ancient people that
lived in this valley
when it looked very different
to how it does today.
And then the other reason is
because there's a beautiful sun
path alignment that happens.
So what happens there
is that at the summer
solstice in the
southern hemisphere
is when the sun reaches its
southernmost tip, and basically
the rays of the
light shoot straight
through the cave on that day.
It's also a beautiful
yoni cave, so it's
a tribute to the divine
feminine and quite beautifully
and significantly
and symbolically.
It's as if the sun impregnates
the rock or the cave
with light, and that is what
marks the summer solstice.
That is a space that
has been calling me ever
since the first
time I went there.
[PLAYING MUSIC]
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
[VOCALIZING]
There's a lot of healing
for myself and for people
to be had there, and the journey
is quite a meditative process.
And I always encourage
people to dance
and move very inspired
by the Saan trance dance
around the fire.
What I'm being used
as a vehicle for
is to remind people and
people that look like me
or anyone who feels the
resonance of the message
that there is a different way.
>> There is a different
way, many in fact,
varying mediums that have the
ability to facilitate healing,
mediums like trance dancing that
allow you to go within to find
a focused emotional intensity
and heal through movement.
[END THEME PLAYING]